Uh, this bill and thought it's very similar
to the listener submitters on the emergency management bill.
Both things at the same time. So,
Yeah. So look,
you can take your submission, um, as read, uh,
but you know, you know the drill,
highlight anything you wanna highlight.
Uh, and if you want to leave time
for questions, we really appreciate that.
And thank you again, uh, for the work that, uh, you all do.
So, um, your time starts now.
I'll get, I'll tell you when, uh, four minutes is,
is, uh, still four minutes to go?
Okay.
We're all set then. Cool. Yep. Thanks Mr. Chair.
And it is nice to see you again. Thank you for that.
And, and thanks to members of the committee.
Uh, so as you know, Alan Pal,
I'm Chief Executive at Civil Contractors in New Zealand.
Uh, my colleague online is Fraser May Fra is our
communications and advocacy manager.
Um, so as you say, we'll take our submission as read,
uh, as you'd expect.
Overall, we strongly support the Bill's ambition
to streamline, modernize
and speed up the processes
that are contained in the public's work,
the Public Works Act.
Uh, we certainly think this will improve efficiency in
delivering projects such as water networks, roads,
sea walls, other public works, which as you expect,
have a public good outcome.
We do, however, wanna make sure we avoid unintended
consequences such as enabling clients
to advocate public consultation responsibilities,
or transferring risk to contractors,
or placing contractors in position
where they might somehow be in conflict
with local communities.
So, for us, clarity is really important.
Uh, ambiguity is undesirable.
Uh, understanding how the bill interfaces
with other parallel legislation such as the RNA, such
as the Local Government Act will be important
and clear, concise drafting is necessary.
So details matter, clarity and alignment matters.
A clear understanding of
what the bill contemplates in practice matters.
Uh, from my comments, the bill needs
to directly address works undertaken when emergency strikes,
such as, uh, major weather events and natural disasters.
Hence, of course, uh, Mr.
Chira comment to the last submission, um,
that you heard from us how these works were initiated
and what protection contractors were had from liability
needs to be directly stated.
This is consistent with our submission
that we made on the emergency management bill.
Um, so I'll now introduce my colleague Fraser
to add some of his comments.
Thank you.
Thanks, Alan. Um, hi everyone.
Uh, just, uh, guess we can get
through this reasonably quickly.
I think we've, we've made Alan,
Alan summarized the points quite nicely there,
but I guess, um, you know, I'd just like to cover off,
um, three simple points.
One, strong support for the bill's objectives.
We firmly support the Bill's ambitions, um, around, uh,
streamline, streamlining the process.
Uh, I guess, you know, it could be a long time for work
to get to market because of some of the stuff.
And, um, there's some projects out there
that have probably had delays
or complications from, from, uh, just these issues
that bills set up to deal with.
So thanks for that. Uh, I think on the point of clarity, um,
you know, I'd just like the qualifier support
with some suggestions.
Um, so a few of the steps, I mean, it's true that a few
of the steps handled in the project delivery under the bill
come before a contractor's involvement.
So their client issues, I suppose, like, you know, if they,
for ZTA or Kiwi Rail a lot of the time,
but often it does wind up being just add some more detail
to Alan's point that does wind up being contractors
that deal with the communities once the
projects are in play.
So, um, I think that's, that's what, uh, the point
around risk allocation is if, um,
if we had streamlined the process so much that the public,
um, has not had a good conversation with the client
around why the project is going ahead, so the need
for the project and, um, what the project will involve
for their land, then, um,
it can often be the contractor on the front line dealing
with the angry community, you know?
So I think, um, that's the situation
that we're trying to avoid.
Um, so just encourage you to, to, to check the bill
that we're not creating too many
opportunities for that to happen.
Um, in terms of alignment with other legislation,
I think Alan mentioned, well, government Act,
there are a couple of others that are in train,
and Alan also mentioned the emergency management bill,
and also the root of the emergency management provisions in
the emergency management bill
and in the Public works, uh, act, uh,
from the Resource Management Act,
which is also under review.
And we'll be submitting on that again soon.
So those three, uh, uh, key pieces of legislation
for us in terms of how they enable contractors to act in,
um, in emergency situations.
I think in terms of the public works side of things, um,
you know, I think it's a really, uh, good step to see, uh,
you know, clients being able to streamline, you know,
resilience, recovery, that side of things and,
and perhaps build back better.
But, um, yeah, Simon, so you, you've got a question?
No, I'll, I'll, I'll,
I'll pick up the questions when you're finished. Um, Fraser
Okay, great. Yep.
And, um, just, uh, any uncertainty
around emergency works, uh,
can really be cause some hiccups.
So I think, you know, we encourage you to have a look at
how those pieces of legislation align
and how the, the, the, uh, bill aligns
with the proposed new resource management system,
because that's, that's gonna be important.
Um, those provisions for emergency management are, um,
are something our members rely on when they're,
when they're working on, on recovery.
So, just a quick summary, uh, cc engine support,
streamlining faster processes, public good, uh,
that's gonna improve, improve efficiency in delivering works
like water networks, roads, sea walls, other public works.
Uh, we're urging reformers not
to offer open up too many opportunities for clients
to abdicate public consultation.
Uh, and we endorse the bill direction.
Just, uh, you know, perhaps a little bit
of fine tuning and polishing to go.
So thanks for considering our remarks
and, uh, we'll take any questions now. Thanks,
Alan. Thanks Fraser. Um, Simon,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, yeah, thanks, Fraser.
Just coming back to your, uh, comments about alignment, uh,
with the resource management reforms, uh,
and your concerns that if they're not aligned,
you potentially risk confusion
around land position objections and dispute processes.
Uh, have, have you got any suggestions for this committee as
to what changes in drafting, um, might be helpful?
I think, I think what happens with contractors, they tend
to be in between, so they're not actually mentioned
in a lot of legislation.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and so the, the responsibility
to enforce on the client,
but then the risk is that the clients will,
will shift the risk to the contractor.
Um, you know, and that, and that, um, comes at a cost.
So contractors will price
that into their projects inevitably.
Um, or if they don't, then they, they could be put at risk.
So, I mean, how, how you deal with that in the bills,
I guess, I mean, I'm not a professional draft person on
these things, but, um, I think there are two things here.
One, the provisions in the RMA replacement, um, should be
as clear as possible, and we'll be submitting on that in, in
that piece of legislation to, um, the public works,
uh, amendment bill.
I mean, I, I do wonder if there are opportunities here to
further recognize the direct role
that contractors have in emergency response and recovery.
Um, so say if there's a sea wall that needs to be built
to protect the property, uh, you know, anything that can,
can streamline that process to sort of save the property,
uh, you know, is, is gonna be of benefit to everyone.
So I think, you know, that's probably the other flip side of
That. Mr. Mr. Chair,
if I may just clarify? Yes. Yep.
Um, uh, so I guess what I'm picking up, Fraser,
if you just confirm this, is that you're looking
for potentially some, uh, protections for contractors doing
physical works, um, in the emergency space.
If they have to get a machine on site
and start doing things, uh,
that potentially aren't available to contractors,
but are available, say to the council
that might engage them.
Mm-hmm. Um, so, so that's that, that, I just wanna confirm
that that's something that, that you're asking for
or that you're hinting at.
Yeah, so the other, so emergency works, right?
So it, it does set under the Lifelines authority,
so it'd be councilors or NCTA, so they've got the powers
for the recovery side of things.
The immediate response, though, I think,
um, there's a crossover.
I think we know in our emergency management bill submission
around the moral responsibility
to save lives and that sort of thing.
So, but I think this, this public works, uh, I mean,
bill does sit with the clients
and I mean, think, um, some of the timeframes Yeah,
I, I just from memory look, I mean, I'm, I've,
I'm waffling here, so yeah, please, please,
um, go on to the next point.
We, we, we don't, we don't waffle, uh, Ja, um,
phrase because Yeah.
Okay. Um, can I just ask you one quick question?
It is, it is one that we wrestled with,
because this is the second time we've had a, um,
public Works act, um, a bill in front of us, uh,
in the last, uh, what, 12, 12 to 18 months.
Um, one that we wrestled with is the whole, uh, requirement,
which you've highlighted, uh, for, uh, clients, uh,
to engage with, uh, the public
before they, you know,
go down the compulsory acquisition process
to actually identify, uh, what the project is, uh,
why it is, and also why it needs particular pieces
of property and the options considered.
Um, so you are obviously stressing to us that
that's an important part of the process.
Definitely. That's a key point, um,
if you handled that well.
And, um, I think there have been steps in the bill
to improve that in terms of compensation, in terms
of conversation, in terms of streamlining timeframes
as well, setting some really clear expectations
of those people about what might be needed
for their projects and property.
So the project's on their property, um, and,
and what compensation they're receiving return, then
that's gonna, uh, resolve a lot of the issue
for contractors, um, and,
and probably take them outta the
firing line with communities.
Yeah. So yeah, absolutely stress this up to the, the clients
to make that case for the need through to the community.
I, I think the issue was that
because now you're, excuse me, now you're able
to start two processes at once.
You're able to start the designation process at the same
time as the PWA process,
rather than having one and then the other.
Uh, and that's why that
that conversation becomes even more important.
Look, really, really appreciate it.
Thank you, um, our time. Appreciate
It. Thanks. Thank you very much.
Cheers.
Excuse me. Okay, so we've got Orion next. Okay.
And, and, uh, presumably that means, um, AWA, uh,
not, no, sorry, sorry.
Troops chief pulled out. They have full, okay.
Right, Ryan, Vivian, nice to see you again.
Yes, good to see you again. Second
Time, what, how many days it is.
Yeah, that's right. Right. So good morning.
So you know the drill. You know the drill.
I've got 10 minutes, so I'll get that started now.
I'll tell you with four to go. Um,
but we do like the old question here,
that, so in your hands. Okay.
Thank you. So, um, good morning
and thank you for the opportunity to appear
before the committee this morning
and speak to our submission on the bill.
Um, my name is Vivian Wilson.
I'm the policy lead at Orion New Zealand.
And with me, I also have Wendy Hughes, who's Orion's Land
and Legal Advisor, and we also have Matthew, um,
Olston, a partner at Denton's Kensington Swan.
So Orion is the third largest
electricity distribution business in New Zealand.
Our network extends from banks Peninsula to, uh,
Arthur's Pass from the Wei River to the river.
And we have over 229,000 customer connections,
over 14,300 kilometers of lines and cables,
and over 90,000 power poles.
Importantly, we are 100% community owned,
and we have two key shareholders, Christchurch City Council,
through its subsidiary, Christchurch City Holdings
and Cell and District Council.
So our job is to distribute power from the National Grid
through our network to homes
and businesses in Central Canterbury.
We build, maintain,
and upgrade the substations poles, power lines,
underground cables,
and other equipment required to deliver power safely
and reliably.
So, electricity, as you know, is an essential service,
powering homes and businesses and vital infrastructure
and its safety and reliability underpin the wellbeing
and prosperity of Canterbury
and Central Waitaha Canterbury is a popular place to live
and run a business with the region experiencing
strong sustained growth.
The Selwyn District is currently New Zealand's fastest
growing district,
and in the year to June, 2024 alone, um,
Selwin's population grew by 3.9%,
which was more than double the national average of 1.7%.
So this growth is expected
to continue putting increased pressure on our network
to support new connections and meet rising peak demand.
And most of this growth's going
to come from the residential sector
alongside expanding commercial and industrial needs.
And as we just decarbonize, electricity is going
to play an even greater role in transport, heating, cooking,
and other everyday uses further accelerating demand.
So Orion strongly supports the Public Works Amendment bill,
but as we have said in our written submission, we would like
to propose a change.
One we actually think is consistent
with the existing policy settings
and objectives of the bill under the current act.
Orion as a network utility operator can access the Public
Works Act, but only through section 1 8 6 of the RMA
and an application to the Minister for Land information.
This approach is slow and cumbersome,
and I think Matthew was going
to just add a few points here about
how the process works under Section 1 8 6.
Yes, thank you. Um, so if Orion was
to ask the minister under 1 8 6 to, um,
exercise his statutory powers,
then it really restarts the whole process.
And so Orion may have negotiated with a landowner,
then ask the minister to exercise his powers,
and then if the minister agrees,
the minister will start a fresh negotiation.
So you kind of go backwards,
and the poor landowner has two negotiations.
Um, so it's quite inefficient.
That's if the minister agrees to take it on at all.
The advantage of what part two B of the bill proposes is
that if Orion was in Transparent's shoes,
they could take the process up to a certain point,
and then the Minister could take it on
and carry, carry forward from there.
So there'd be no loss of momentum and no duplication.
And so we'd see that that process is very much aligned
with the Bill's objectives, um,
and fear of the landowners as well.
Yes. So our, our, our reasoning behind our submission is
that with trans power being 100% owned
by the New Zealand government,
they will now have direct access
to the Public Works Act under the bill.
And our submission is that EDBs
that are network utility operators,
and this is the key thing owned by local authorities,
should also have direct access to the act.
The effect of this change would be
that we would have direct access to the PWA
and not need to seek the involvement
of the minister under the Section 1 8 6 process.
So simply put, if Parliament agrees
that there should be an easier pathway for trans power
to the Public Works Act
'cause of its public ownership, then it also makes sense
for the same policy settings applying to us for there
to be an easier pathway for EDBs that are council owned.
And this approach would not change the substance
of the way in which the provisions operate for landowners,
but it would be faster
and more efficient, which is one of the goals
of the, of the bill.
So in the South island, there are several
electricity distribution businesses
that are also council organizations.
There's Alpine Energy, which is majority owned by Te Maru,
Yi and Mackenzie.
There's Aurora Energy, which is a hundred percent owned
by Dunedin City Council.
Ashburton, um, electricity Ashburton
or EA networks, which is majority owned
by Ashburton District Council.
And electricity in the Cargill Limited, not yet.
Orion, Alpine Energy, Aurora and electricity at Burton
and electricity in Bacar will represent approximately 65%
of the connections in the South island
when you use statistics from the electricity distributors,
2024 figures.
And we understand that Alpine Energy, Aurora
and EA networks have also supported in submission, um,
in support of this proposal that we've made.
So we think there are sufficient transparency
and accountability controls with our shareholding councils
for EDBs, such as ourselves,
to also have access to these powers.
And these controls include regulation under the Commerce Act
and the Electricity Industry Act, as well
as requirements under the Energy Companies Act.
And this provides for regular reporting to our shareholders
and disclosure and engagement with our customers.
So I guess what I'm saying, we're really just asking
for some consistency.
So if Trans Power has direct access
because of its 100% crown ownership,
why can't entities like Orion
and the others I I mentioned, have the same rights?
Given that we are a hundred percent owned by councils,
it's applying the same policy decision more broadly
and to give effect to the objectives of the bill.
And if this amendment is made,
we do not think these provisions will be used frequently,
but the fact that we could directly access these provisions
may mean that transactions are undertaken more quickly
and projects progress at a faster pace,
even without the provisions being triggered.
And this will be a positive
for developments in the South island,
and no doubt make a difference
to South Island electricity consumers.
So we have used this process in the past,
and we are looking to use this process again to assist with
land acquisition for a new service.
We've only got a couple minutes left.
Okay. Well, I think what I'll do at
that point then is I'll just sum up my key
takeaways for you.
So these are that EDBs are network,
that are network utility operators
and council owned are in a similar position to trans power.
So it makes sense to apply the same changes.
A change of this nature will speed up the process
and create efficiencies for EDBs and customers,
but it's not gonna mean a substantial change for landowners.
And we think this will lead to better outcomes
for the South island and support the government's
electrification priorities. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I've got a question.
I don't see anybody else at the moment,
but what you've, um, you've said is, well, excuse me.
First thing is, how often do you need to use these powers?
I mean, how often do you use these powers?
Uh, do you need access?
And there's a different thing between buying land
and having a, um, an easement over land to put a, um, uh,
uh, wires across it.
And secondly, you've, you've also clearly separated from
private, um, EDBs who are doing exactly the same thing.
Um, I just wondered how you square that.
I, I get the, the, the link with transparent in terms
of ownership, but then you then have exactly the same
potential link with other EDBs, private EDBs,
which are clearly not council owned.
Um, so those two, those two questions
or areas of questions, please?
Uh, well, I'll answer the, the second question first.
We are slightly different from the private companies
that are EDBs.
So under the Energy Companies Act, we do have more, um,
substantial reporting requirements
and auditing requirements under that act.
So there is a difference there
that those provisions in the
Energy Companies Act do not apply.
They're not owned by local authorities.
And in terms of actually using,
using the process under Section 1 8 6, it is,
we don't use it that often.
We've got one coming up and we have,
but we have used it in the past.
So it might even be just, you know,
once in a five year thing.
But, um, you know, if you can gain efficiencies from
that, it's worth doing.
I don't know if Matthew wants to add something else to that.
I think the, the risk of looking at
how often 1 8 6 has been used is that
because it's quite difficult, people don't even try.
Um, so it isn't used that often,
but if it was easier to acquire land, uh,
or easements, uh, then I think it would be used more often.
So the fact
that it hasn't been used much probably isn't a fair
indicator of how much, how often Orion might seek
to use the Public Works Act if it was open to it.
And the fact that landowners know that,
that they could use it, um, is often, uh,
an influential sector as well.
And look, um, we, we, because we're ahead of time
'cause we didn't have one of the submitters, I will ask, uh,
just that, that follow up question, the distinction
between wanting to acquire land
and wanting an easement, overland.
So where you want to, um, string wise across, say, farmland
or whatever else it might be, how does, how does
that distinction work for you?
So, um,
Well, I'm presuming you don't wanna buy great long
corridors of land across, no,
Across farms, for example,
we don't buy lot long corridors for that.
The, the types of land
that the times when we would buy land would be for,
for zone substations or substations, that type of thing.
So we, where we actually need to put like a building,
a actual zone substation building
with substantial infrastructure coming into that building.
That's where we would definitely want to buy the land.
And at the moment, Orion has, uh,
52 zone substations in our network.
Okay. And, and so where you just simply want to, um,
string wires across, um, a property,
you have sufficient powers to be able to do
that at the moment or to negotiate that?
Well, yes, we, we negotiate those using with easements,
Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. No issues with the ability to do that?
As far as I'm aware, no.
Okay. Thank you. Look, really appreciate that.
Thanks very much. Good to see you again.
Thank you. Right,
we have, so they're not here yet?
Not yet. Okay. So Barnes aren't here in the room yet.
Awa, um, and Water New Zealand
and transport all are, so we'll start with Awa
who are next up.
Good morning. Well, you're on mute at the moment.
Okay. That looks be, looks better anyway. Yep. Sort right.
Okay. Look, um, thank you.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, I'll give you a call with about four
to go, uh, just in case.
Um, there are questions which almost inevitably there will
be, um, you can take your submission as read,
but if you wanna highlight any key elements, you know,
please do and, um, look forward to what you've got to say.
And your time starts now.
Mr. Chair, members of the committee.
Um,
so I'm the GM for the environmental team here at koa, uh,
the Roko Charitable Trust, which is mandated
through the KOA Settlement Trust.
Um, I'd just like to thank you for the opportunity to speak
to you today on the Public Works Amendment.
But, uh, so for KOA sits at the center of the North island,
um, our compass Cambridge to the north,
uh, through to toga in the east, southward, uh, to
and west over towards tu.
So this area for the last 150 years has been a focal point
for infrastructure developed from roads, rail, hydro,
electric dams, and transmission infrastructure.
Many of these projects have delivered benefits
to the wider community and the country as a whole,
but they've also come at a significant cost to our people.
Our large areas of our were taken under the Public Works
legislation, culturally significant sites.
We, with displaced relationships between
people and our, uh, our have been severed.
The Crown has acknowledged this history
through our treaty settlement
and our Waikato River settlement arrangements.
Those settlements were intended to be final and enduring.
They were meant to reset the relationship between local
and the ground, moving away from unilateral decision making
and toward a partnership, active protection
and a respect for, and it is from that perspective,
which we is from that perspective
with approached the this bill.
Uh, let me be clear.
AWA supports infrastructure development.
We understand the need for resilient low roads,
energy security, and malfunctioning communities.
We want progress, but progress must not come at the expense
of the integrity of treaty settlements,
nor must they repeat the power,
nor must they repeat the use of powers
that have caused the harm in the first place.
Our submission focuses on four key areas.
Uh, firstly, the absence of a treaty clause.
The bill contains no express reference to.
There's no requirement
that decision makers must act consistently with,
with treaty principles
or with treaty settlement commitments when exercising
compulsory acquisition powers.
And that admission really matters.
The power to com to compulsory acquire land is one
of the most intrusive powers The crown holds
without clear statutory direction, treaty considerations,
risk being treated as optional
or procedural rather than
as binding constitutional obligations.
Excuse me. Other legislations,
including fast track
and conservation laws, have shown
that it's entirely possible
to move efficiently while still
embedding treaty obligations.
And we are simply asking for the same clarity here,
that those exercising power under this act
must act consistently with principles of Treaty
of the Treaty, recognizing settlement commitments
and engage early and meaningfully with the fact iwi.
Uh, secondly, protection of treaty settlement.
Ress land, land return
to Dako under the settlement was not returned as a land bank
for future infrastructure needs.
It was returned to remedy historic breaches
and to provide a foundation where our cultural, social,
environmental and economic recovery,
the bill expands and streamlines acquisition pathways.
And in a region like ours,
where we already host nine hydroelectric dams,
major transmission assets infrastructure process
are real and ongoing.
Without explicit protection, there is a genuine risk
that settlement land could again be exposed
to compulsory acquisition, whether for upgrades, relocation,
joint projects, or network utility works
that would undermine the finality and
and integrity of our settlement framework,
not just local settlement framework.
But for all iwi,
our recommendation is simple here.
3D settlement. Regis land should not be subject
to compulsory acquisition under this act.
Voluntary agreement should always be possible.
Compulsory takings should not.
Thirdly, uh, procedural fairness and independent oversight.
We acknowledge the bill aims to improve efficiencies
and object and objection compensation processes,
but efficiencies must be balanced against the significance
of water is at stake.
The objection processes are not mere technicalities.
They're one of the few independent checks on whether land is
generally necessary or public work.
Whether alternatives have been properly explored
and considered, and whether cultural
and treaty impacts are fully understood.
Where Maori land or treaty settlement interests are
involved, independent oversight is essential.
Compensation cannot answer
for the more fundamental questions
or whether land should have been taken in the first place.
Which brings me to my fourth point.
Compensation is not a substitute for protection.
No payment can restore wha connections to
our connection to our fender.
Our, our connections to our,
our fundamental to our identity.
O valuation can fully account
for the intergenerational impact of land loss.
Settlement land was returned as a restorative process,
treating it as general land to be priced
and re reacquired misunderstands their purpose
protection, not pricing is the appropriate safeguard.
We've got about three minutes left,
Just about that.
Um, finally, just wanted to quickly touch on the
emergency recovery powers.
Uh, we recognize the need for effective emergency response,
especially as climate related events are becoming more
frequent and severe, but we are concerned about
how emergency recovery
and infrastructure decision may interact over time.
There's a real risk that land protection in an emergency
phase may later may later face acquisition process
through follow on recovery or relocation works.
Clear and consistent protection for Maori land
and treaty settlement land must be applied across all
phases, emergency recovery and long-term planning.
Uh, in closing, our treaty settlements are intended
to provide, provide certainty for iwi and for the crown.
That certainty must be reflected in the design
of legislation that authorizes compulsory acquisition.
Uh, we are not asking the committee to slow the process.
We are asking you to strengthen the bills, so the bills so
that infrastructure development
and treaty integrity can advance together
Questions. Thank
you Mr. Chair. Just one question from me around the,
uh, independent oversight
that's touched on in your, um, submission.
Can you just clarify for us how you see that
independent oversight being, um, like, who,
who would, who would do that?
Uh, so which point are you referring to? Sorry. Thanks.
Yep. So you're talking about, um,
the independent oversight for compensation,
and this is 0.6 in your written submission.
Yep. Procedural fairness.
Who, who do you sort of see being responsible
for pro providing or,
or doing that in, um, independent oversight?
Uh, yeah.
Sorry, I don't have an answer for
that at this stage thing. Sorry. No,
No, that's okay. I, I was
wondering whether you were talking
referencing the environment core providing that role
or whether you just think the committee should be thinking
that there needs to be independent oversight and
and you are open to where that comes from
as long as it's independent.
Yeah, yeah. We're open to where that comes from
as long as it's independent. Yeah. Okay.
Carpe One question from me if I can.
Just in terms of emergency works, I'm thinking of situation
where you have, say for example, roads which go through
land, which might, may or may not include,
but let's say it does include this instance
protected Maori land.
If this, we, we, as you mentioned, we get lots
of slips these days and, um, you know, do,
do the road corridors that go through, in your experience,
that go through protected Maori land, are they big enough
to be able to allow that kind of work to be done as opposed
to actually having to come to the landowners
and say, well actually we actually need some more land
because otherwise we can't actually,
you know, restore a road.
Do you know what the situation is there?
If the, and road corridor sizes?
Yeah. Yeah. I suppose it's dependent on
where the roads are and, and those and the landowners.
So, um, I can't really comment on that
to be perfectly honest with you.
The, the ones I'm aware of, um, whether they're subject to,
you know, um, further development due to, um,
slips and the, those types of risks.
Yeah, I'm, I'm unsure of, of the, uh, situation,
Something. We'll see if we
can find out maybe from one of the, uh,
some, maybe from the likes of NZTA.
Mm. And really appreciate it. Thank you very much.
No worries, Caroline. Okay,
now we've got Barnes in the room.
We get Barnes on, sorry, on,
on the room in the metaphorical room.
Yeah, they're ready to go, right. Okay.
Kiara. Hi Kath, nice to see you
Ura. Nice to see you too. And
thank you for having me. My
Pleasure. Of the
committee. Right.
So, um, we've got, we've can, you can take your submission
as read, so things you wanna highlight, it'll be great.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
I'll give you a call with about four to go, um, just
because we do like to ask the old question here or there.
So, um, in your hands.
Thank you so much. And, uh, thank you for having me, uh,
present to the committee this morning.
That's one of my favorite things about the New Zealand
government and the way that we do things is
that we have the civic committee
and the way that we approach that.
Uh, so it's great to be here. Good.
Um, barns, uh, is a incorporated society, uh, which,
um, has members who, who support it.
And they are largely airlines who flighted
to from and within New Zealand.
Our members, of course include in New Zealand and Qantas
and Chathams, uh, but also include the likes of Emirates
or Singapore Airlines or, or a long list of others.
Uh, we also have members who are ground handlers, uh, such
as Menzies and Swissport who operate at airports
and, uh, other members who manage waste and,
and a range of other, um, associated businesses to aviation.
Importantly in the context of,
of the Public Works Amendment, bill Bonds, uh, is
also defined
as a substantial customer under the Commerce Act,
which means that we participate in pricing conversation
with regulated airports at the moment.
Those are Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch airports.
Um, and, and I know that you have read, uh,
the Barn submission to the Public Works Amendment bill,
and I don't propose to to go through that specifically, uh,
except for just to, at the very highest level say that,
that we are supportive, um, of, of the bill in particular,
the preserving
and streamlining compulsory acquisition as a viable tool
for airport related infrastructure.
Uh, barn members know that airports, uh, need to be able
to operate aerobically safely,
and sometimes that means that
that land acquisition is needed
and we really support the, the bills changes,
which allow those things to happen more quickly than,
than perhaps historically.
Um, and particular when you think about potentially
emergency, uh, recovery and things like that.
One thing I wanted to just make sure the committee
understands is how, um, the compensation
and incentive payments for, um, early agreement
and the increases for home loss
and land loss payments, uh, will become
cost in the aviation system.
So for clarity, uh, bond supports fair compensation for,
for land owners who are affected by, uh,
compulsory acquisition and,
and we support the, um, the, uh,
fair compensation is currently laid out in the bill around,
uh, home loss payments rising to 50,000
and land loss to 35,000.
So we, we support, uh, those, those compensation amounts.
But I just wanted to make sure that it is clear that
when an airport buys a piece of land,
that land enters into what we, uh,
call the regulated asset base
or rab, uh, which is the basis for which
airports essentially set a charge for
airlines who land at that airport.
And what what happens is the, the regulated asset bases,
if you like, margined,
and under our regulated settings, the airport is allowed
to set its own target return.
Um, for example, uh,
electricity companies are given a target return under, uh,
the Commerce Act, but airport companies can set a
target of their own choosing.
Um, and so that is usually higher
than the commerce commissions.
In fact, it is always higher than the commerce commissions
target return for reports as published.
And so as the regulated asset base gets larger,
the charges for airlines also increase as a consequence,
and they increase in perpetuity
because the regulated asset base value
essentially grows every year
and then is charged every year, if that makes sense.
So I really just wanted to call that out
and sort of say, uh, you know, we support,
we support the changes, we support the incentives, um, and,
and, uh, home loss payments has, has laid out,
but we just wanted to remind the committee
of the flow on effect
of these charges into the aviation system,
which is wholly user pays.
Um, and just sort of throw a word of caution
behind any increases, um,
that might be proposed in that space.
And that's, and that's my message for today.
You, uh, we've got about five, five minutes to go.
Any questions? I'll ask one then.
And it's just, you, me, you said that, um, uh,
land when it's purchased enters the regulated asset base.
Can you just clarify for us, I probably should know this,
but, um, it's a question that's just occurred to me.
Um, whether airports can purchase land for
non-regulated purposes,
and I'm thinking, for example, airports which will end up
purchasing land, which turns into car parking.
Um, but they need the car parking
to support the regulated part,
but the car parking is not regulated.
Can they that?
Yes. Uh, my understanding is that they can, uh,
and it is difficult to sort of, um, support that
or not support that because every situation is different,
but airports, um, operate as one, a business,
one entity, and within that business, some of the income
that they earn might be commercial and not.
Yes, I'm not aware of that. Yeah.
Then the other would be, would be regulated. And so, so
Yeah. So I,
I try, I'd try another example,
and that's the example where an airport may wish
to purchase land for essentially business parks.
'cause a lot of airports
have business parks attached to them.
Yeah. I can't recall whether it's actually commercial, uh,
sorry, um, uh, the ability to compulsory acquire
that, um, or not.
Um, but that also would not be part
of the regulated asset base.
But if it's able to be comp compulsory acquired, that's,
Yes. And, and
I'm not sure I've heard of an example of that,
but I certainly have the car parking
And there's also, uh, options for land held
for future use, which can be charged.
So land that's, that might be acquired
but not used for anything in the short term.
Uh, and that can be, can be accounted
for in the regulatory regime.
I think, um, uh, you know, to some extent, uh, you know,
commercial income for airports is useful.
What we have in New Zealand is a challenge where
that commercial income does not support the aeronautical
business and does not have to, uh, so, you know,
the commercial income is, is a benefit
to the airport shareholders, generally speaking.
Yes. And that's why I was asked the question. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Any other questions?
No, it looks like that it's very clear.
Thank you, Catherine. Really appreciate it.
Cheers. Thank you. Okay.
Uh, next up we have water New Zealand in person.
Jillian, nice to see you. Sure.
Thank you for providing your opportunity.
So you, you got the, um, the rules
of the game in terms of time and so on.
Yes. Good. Thank you. Yep.
I'll start your, I'll start your time now
and I'll give you a call at about, um,
about four to go if you're still going.
Cool. Thank you. Koto.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the, the committee.
Um, just to provide some context,
the water service delivery plans that were submitted
to the Department of Internal Affairs last year as part
of the local water done well, um, policy signaled the need
to invest $48 billion in water infrastructure
over the next 10 years.
So there will be times when the water service providers,
whether they are in-house council business units,
or whether they are council controlled organizations,
will need to use the Public Works Act.
So having
provided the context, just wanted to highlight two points.
Um, one relates to the emergency response pathway.
Um, as we read the bill, this is limited
for two years following the declaration of a state
of emergency from the practical experience
of Water New Zealand members.
That timeframe is too narrow.
We are suggesting that it's extended to more like six
to allow, um, more, um, you know, more appropriate
and considered investigation of options
for the remediation and recovery.
Um, which can include try, you know, mapping out where
the, the, the new infrastructure might be required
and then purchasing, um, purchasing land
and achieving, uh, securing budgets, et cetera.
Um, the other piece I just wanted to highlight was that, uh,
the emergency response pathway in our minds should be
extended to include climate change mitigation
as a specific public works.
I'm happy to take questions, happy
to comment on the comments from, uh, from bonds.
Certainly as I'm, as I highlight in the, in,
in our submission, the compensation regime that's proposed,
we totally understand why it's being proposed.
But you can imagine that when you've got $48 billion worth
of investment required over 10 years, um,
you can certainly see an increase in those costs
that might occur through being
required to pay for compensation.
And that will pass through to you
and I as, um, payers of water services around the country.
Okay. Thank you. Questions. Thank Mr. Chairman and Simon.
Um, thank you. And thank you
for coming in today just on the, the two year timeframe,
you've, you've landed on six years.
Yep. Can, can you just sort of talk us
through why you think six years, and maybe it's
because it's more than two,
but some point in the future, um, and,
and the possibility of what you've referred to
as an extension might kind of take that a bit further,
um, if, if needed.
Yep. So I think in terms
of why six rather than two, it's bigger.
Um, uh, I I perhaps just to put this in context, um,
sometimes, and you can imagine it, in some of the floods
that we've seen in the last couple of months of 2026,
you could have a bridge that's, um, washed out
and that bridge has always carried the drinking water
pipe or the wastewater pipe.
But in the conversations with the roading authorities,
they'd make a decision that they will no longer replace
that, that bridge.
And so then you need to find another alternative way
of conveying the water
or the wastewater, um, to those communities on either side.
And so some of this is simply, you go through that process,
there are conversations that are happening with insurers,
and you need to be able to work through
with the other utilities that are, um, being
provided in, in that region.
And it might just simply take longer
Just in terms of, you know, the possibility
of an extension.
Um, and with more frequent adverse weather events mm-hmm.
It might be, you know, quite a sensible approach.
But do, do you think that the mechanism by which
that extension would be granted, which would need
to be in, in the pool?
Um, it's probably gonna be self-evident
of the extensions need anyway,
but it should just be a more
of a transactional thing rather than a, a full assessment.
I think it should be a more of a transactional matter.
Thank you. I, because at the end of the day, making it more,
making it something that's not transactional is just going
to add additional cost and to delay the process.
Because at the end of the day, all of us are wanting
to make sure that the communities are receiving their
essential infrastructure services, the lifeline utilities,
um, you know, that are required to, to maintain, you know,
healthy, healthy living. Thank
You, Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, uh,
nice to see you again, Julian.
Um, I just wanna pick up on your, uh, suggestion that,
uh, the pathway, uh, should allow
firing authorities, uh, to include
climate change mitigation as a specific public work.
Can you just clarify, do you mean adaptation
or do you mean mitigation, which is more
commonly associated with reducing emissions?
Um, I think in this context, I mean adaptation, right?
Um, I mean it's a, it, it's an element to which, um,
we want to mitigate.
I mean, just just thinking of some of the, the land slips
that we've seen, we need to be able to, to consider, um,
the impact of,
of the surrounding countryside on the water infrastructure,
which as we saw with Cyclone Gabriel, there was significant,
um, trees slash that destroyed pipes.
I think this, the pipeline
that went in towards the Gisborne Township broke in six
places because of slash
because of, of, um, you know,
that impact on, on, on that service.
And so I think if I was sitting in this, in the shoes
of a water service provider
and looking at the risk assessment to our, um, to our,
the provision of services, being able
to use the public works to take some of these actions,
I think is gonna be really important.
Okay. Thank you. And Mr.
Chair, I did have a another primary question about a
terminology and definitions, if that's okay, quickly.
Yep. Uh, Julian, uh, in your submission, you point out that,
um, there's lots of references to the RMA, uh, in this bill,
and you've sought consistent
and robust definitions of key terms across all legislation.
Have you made a submission to
that effect on the resource management bills?
Um, we have made a submission.
Um, we are currently in the position
where no one from the water sector is actually being able
to address that select committee, um, which we are.
Um, we've raised a question with the clerk of
that committee, um,
because it is really important given, you know,
the $48 billion that is going
to be spent on water infrastructure, whether it's on,
you know, the, whether we can do it in a more economic
and efficient way such
that we get more infrastructure for that amount.
But that's an awful lot of money to be spending,
and we don't want to fall into situations when we have
roadblocks because the public works,
the emergency management legislation that's going
through at the same time, um, and the planning
and natural environment bills
all don't understand the impact.
You know, just thinking from the water sector of
what it means to be a water organization,
which is a CCO that's, um, providing water services
or whether you are as an in-house business unit, we need
to make sure that that's absolutely,
we've got consistent definitions.
And there's another piece of legislation which I forgot
to mention, which is the infrastructure funding
and finance amendment bill,
which there's another committee looking at at the moment.
It is vital that we get consistency. Thank you.
Just one question from me, Jillian,
and that's, um, a question which I asked the, um,
Orion, uh, earlier today.
Um, it's when do you need to acquire land?
How often do you need to acquire land?
And when do you essentially use easements across
for, for example, pipes? Um,
I, I, I can't give you across the 67 councils.
Yeah, yeah. No, I can't give you a fa a
Ballpark, a flavor. A a
a flavor of the frequency with which acquiring land
as opposed to, because they said the acquiring is basically
for things like substations, whereas when they've got
lines going across land, that's generally by
what, by way of easement?
I i, is that generally what you see with water entities.
Um, I will come back rather than
provide you a, that'll be cool.
Um, the wrong, the wrong, um, it steer, I'll come back
with a, with some advice on that. It just gives
Us a bit of a feel of the, the frequency with which the,
the need to acquire land
Because most of water infrastructure is under the ground.
Yes. That I think is a difference between, uh, you know,
the, the, the amount of electricity, um, distribution lines
that are, that are underground relative to overground.
Yes, I understand that, yeah. Is is different.
Whereas for water, it's primarily
The point is that neither of you hidden, neither
of you are on the ground, and
therefore somebody can usually use the ground
for something either under their wires or above your pipes.
So, yeah. No, I appreciate it.
Thank you very much, Jillian. Thank I look forward to that advice.
Cool. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Right, we have in the room, uh, trans power.
Welcome,
welcome.
Good to be here. Um,
and, uh, we have, um, uh, got the usual rule, 10 minutes.
I'll give you a call about four to go.
Um, take your submission as read,
but anything you wanna highlight
and, um, look forward to what you've got to say. Thank
You, Mr. Chair.
Uh,
and thank you for the opportunity to come and see you today.
Uh, I'm Matt Fanning, head of Landowner Relations
and Property at Trans Power,
and my colleague Joan Moore,
who's our Senior Corporate Council at Trans Power.
Uh, I'll just jump straight in
'cause you have seen our submission.
Uh, yeah. Electricity demand is forecast to grow
by 68% by 2050.
We are working to connect significant renewable energy
generation at load to the grid, um, and we, and,
and load to meet that growing demand.
We've got a really busy program of new build
and major upgrade projects to enable that growth.
New transmission lines are long linear infrastructure,
nationally critical infrastructure, uh,
often necessitating land access from dozens if not
hundreds of landowners.
I guess to, um, to anticipate a question you've asked to,
um, previous submitters.
Yeah. We typically acquire easements
for our transmission lines, so non-exclusive rights, um,
for our wires to go over the top or underneath the ground.
Um, but we also may by on occasion acquire, uh, you,
you know, freehold land
or leasehold land for, for substations.
Uh, while we've done our best
to avoid using the Public Works Act,
compulsorily acquire land, uh, the last time we did so
for three properties was in 2014, um, we are likely to need
to use the PWAA lot more with that increasing work program
and that, that build and upgrade program that we've got.
So we really need the, the Public Works Act to be fit
for purpose and to enable, um, us to deliver the much needed
electricity transmission infrastructure at pace.
Under the current Public Works Act settings, it can take us
more than two years to compulsory acquire land, uh,
much longer than that.
With appeals and judicial reviews, uh, uh,
we must apply under section 180 6 of the RMA
to the Minister for Land Information.
And at that point, we have to step back losing control
of timeframes, costs,
relationships, outcomes, and reputation.
We have ongoing good faith relationships with our landowners
and the way in which we acquire that land
or those easements can impact our ongoing operations
and maintenance activities.
We've lodge lodged a brief submission, uh,
largely in support of the bill.
Um, we have set out some, some kind
of high level technical amendments,
but we, which we're not gonna delve
into in too much detail today.
There is one that we wanted to call out.
Um, we also support changes to the bill
to streamline processes.
For example, replacing section 18 notices
with good faith negotiations, additional incentives
for landowners, uh, additional protections
for acquiring Maori land,
and the reducing the duplication of alternatives assessments
between the Public Works Act and,
and Resource Management Act. I'll hand over to you, Joe.
Okay. So I wanted to talk about part two B of the bill.
Um, trans Paths strongly supports the new concept
of a trans power work and that part of the bill.
And we see that these provisions will enable us
to undertake, undertake public Work Act processes directly
similar to other infrastructure operators, funds
and council controlled organizations.
And we've seen, uh, some
of the other submitters have raised concerns about the
appropriateness of transparency as an SOE, having direct,
uh, the, the ability to directly, um,
undertake these processes.
And we, um, just wanted
to touch on the reasons why we think it is
con as appropriate.
Um, as Mr. Leston mentioned for, um, Orion, uh, the,
the ultimate decision
to compulsory acquire remains with the minister.
It's only the preliminary steps that would be, um, able
to be undertaken by trans power,
but, um, these preliminary steps could remove at least
12 months from the process.
So we think that there are sufficient safeguards
to give comfort that there will be transparency
and accountability in any Public Works Act processes
that transparent undertakes
and to name a few, um, as an SOE, we're subject
to greater scrutiny and transparency
and commercial entities more generally.
Transparent shareholders are ministers
and we receive letters of expectation.
We appear before the select committee during scrutiny week.
We are subject to audits by government auditors,
and we are bound by the Official Information Act.
Um, under the SOE Act, trans palm must also, um, act
as an organization that exhibits a sense
of social responsibility by having regard to the interests
of the community under which it operates.
And we also issue, um,
ministers without draft statement of corporate intent.
We also under understand
that Lins would also increase its regulatory oversight PWA
system, including of trans power.
So I'll hand back to Mitch. Thanks,
Joe. Uh, yeah. So
in our submission, um,
we've set out some technical amendments,
but there's only really one that we
wanted to bring to your attention.
And that is providing the ability for trans power
to access land for surveys
and investigation under section 111, um,
under section 111.
Um, currently, um, uh, though the Crown
and local authorities can access land for surveys
and investigation, but network utility operators, um,
which we are currently defined as, um, must, must use, uh,
section 1 1 1 A, which means we have to apply to the court,
uh, for access to land for those survey
and investigation, um, uh,
processes, which are very early on.
Um, we think trans power should also have access
to section 111, similar to the Crown
and, and local authorities.
That better aligns with the new concept
of a trans power work in the bill.
Um, if we undertake, if we were
to undertake those processes efficiently, we think we need,
um, access land for survey and investigation, uh, early on.
Um, if that's not amended,
we'd have to go through the district court.
And we think that that unnecessarily places an increased
burden on the courts.
And, and as I said, doesn't align with the, the new concept
of a trans power work.
So I think that's probably all that we've got to say.
We're happy to take any questions you may have.
Thank you. Uh, just look for questions. Sorry, Tangi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank you both.
Um, you talked about, uh, sort
of acquisition in relation to Maori land.
Whereabouts is that in your written submission? I can't,
No, I think we just, we, um, we know that
that is something that, that
that many will have submitted on.
And also hearing, um, many submissions on the previous
public works at Critical Infrastructure Bill, we note
that in the the bill there's an additional step,
we're acquiring Maori defined Maori land, that there,
there is a additional process step to go
through the Minister of Maori, uh,
development, I believe it is. Um, and we support that.
Just, um, we've heard this morning from, uh, for example,
Koa about treaty sediment redress land being effectively
protected from this process.
Do you have any, um, any submissions on that aspect?
We haven't, speci as Matt said,
haven't specifically lodged a submission,
but we go through, I think there's a difference
between new assets and existing assets.
If we've got existing assets on that land, uh,
which we may well do because we have been, you know,
our assets are in treaty settlements, um,
because they were historically compulsory,
the land was compulsory acquired historically, um,
we would still need to maintain those assets.
Um, for new land, we carry out an acre process
where we do some constraints mapping,
and certainly we would treat all Maori land as,
as a significant constraint, consistent
with the Privy Council case of McGuire,
that it really is last resort.
So we would do our best to, to avoid Maori land. Okay.
Okay. Question from me, same question that I asked, uh,
Ryan and, and bought in New Zealand is that,
that the relationship between, um, acquisition of land
and, um, and an easement, which I presume most
of the mm-hmm.
Assets you've got are on e on easements
of some, some form or, yeah.
Can you just walk us through how that works
and how, how frequent you actually, how frequently?
You said it's not that frequent,
you actually have to acquire land.
Yes. But you see that might have more often,
but just the scale of those two
and the process you've gotta go through
for the easement process, let alone
Yeah. So currently, sorry.
Yes.
Um, so currently it's a,
it's a negotiated process if we need to, um, uh, complete,
um, major upgrades where we don't have rights to do
that under the Ultra Act
or where we need to build new transmission lines,
where we'll negotiate with landowners on a,
on a commercial basis to acquire those easements.
And, and should that fail
after we've, um, exhausted negotiations, we would, um, apply
to access compulsory requisition powers.
Uh, does that kind of answer you?
So, so in that situation,
you are compulsory acquiring the land itself,
not the easement, or you compulsory No,
Typically it'd be easements for
Transmission lines. Oh, so you, so
you compulsory acquire an
Easement. Correct. And that
would be either overhead
for the wires or underground for cables.
And it's a non-exclusive property. Right.
Which means other, other compat compatible property use can
Continue. Right. And the PWA helps
you with acquiring the easements?
Correct. Just as it does acquiring their actual,
It's, it's, it's the interest in land, whether
that's freehold, leaseholder or easement or something
Else. Um, and do you have
a comment around the comments that they,
that were made by Orion in particular around, um,
uh, EDBs having access?
I mean, they're your, you know, the branches, the,
the feed off, the, the Yeah.
Main trunk. And also they distinguish between you,
you mentioned your, um, a greater level of scrutiny
that you have, considerable level of scrutiny that you have.
Um, they distinguished obviously between the private, uh,
privately owned and the publicly owned, um, EDBs,
see comments on EDBs and then on public as privately.
Yeah. If you would, if you would.
I think we, I think some of our assets are of the same scale
where, you know, the EDBs across the board, regardless
of the ownership, will, will have the same challenges in
terms of accessing land.
Um, but I,
I don't think we have a comment on
whether they should have access.
I understand that to public website.
Okay. But thank you. I don't see any other
questions, so really appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Thank you for
Your time.
Right. Okay. So that takes us to,
we're ahead of time at the moment, but that's Okay.
Good. We can go to Selwyn District Council if, uh,
if you're there, you worship
morning, you worship, nice to see you
Morning Again.
Twice in a couple of days, I think it is.
No. And, uh, are, are you this afternoon as well?
Yes, we are. Oh, you are, you're,
you are back this afternoon too, aren't you? Yeah,
I am. Yes,
indeed. Okay. Look, um, you know,
so you know the drill we've got take your submission
as read, anything you wanna highlight,
we've got you there for 10 minutes.
And, um, uh,
and I'll give you a call with about four to go if you are,
um, if you're still speaking.
Oh, we're all good. I won't mark around here.
I, I know that you, um, have a, a fairly busy day
and I'm just checking that, um, I have, uh, one
of our staff members online, um, as well. So just,
We'll, we'll, we'll, um, let you go until I'll,
I'll pause the time because we
are actually ahead of time anyway.
Um, until you get your, your staff member on,
Just make sure he is here.
You see people coming in. We don't have them online yet.
Any sign
if you do you need that,
you need your staff member, I would imagine.
Well, yes, it was my
preference because that's the guy that, um,
What, what, what, what, what we can do, what we can do is
to put you is, is to, um,
change the batting order a little bit, um, put, uh, Sington,
uh, Denton's Kensington Swan on next,
and then, uh, gives you 10 minutes to sort of, um,
get them on, get 'em online. Okay. So we'll do that.
Yes. Thank you, Andy. I will go
and chase him up right now.
Okay. Thank you. Right. Okay.
Let's get, uh, Denton Kensington Swan on.
Nice to see you back, Matthew.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Okay.
So this is your submission rather
than in support of anybody else.
Indeed. Yes. So, yeah, you've got the drill.
Thank you. So your time starts now.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to present
our submission on Public Works Amendment bill.
I'm Matthew Leston, a partner at Denton's Kenton Swan,
where I lead our Public Works practice.
As we said in our submission, we advise a range of central
and local government agencies
and the consultants on PWA acquisitions
as well as a few landowners.
And so what we're seeking to bring you is, I guess our,
our own views informed by the work that we've done
for clients, but really a view from
the trenches, as it were.
Uh, some of the practical issues that we see
that we think the bill could address.
I wanna say at the outset that we support the bill, um,
and note that it sits alongside the other pieces
of legislation in the government's wider
infrastructure program.
The Fast Track Approvals Act in 2024,
and the critical infrastructure amendments only last year.
However, this is by far the least controversial
of the three being largely technical in nature,
rather than making broad policy changes.
And we hope that this means it might progress
with broad support, because the faster we get this done,
the faster we can deliver infrastructure.
So while we support the bill, we think there are a, a number
of instances where it probably could have gone further, uh,
and by doing so, would make greater impact, uh,
and seek to give greater effect to the principles
of the targeted lens review,
which underpins this whole bill, which was
to improve the efficiency, effectiveness,
and clarity of land acquisition objections and compensation.
I should say that this, this is not just about making it
easier for the government to take people's land.
A number of the changes in the bill
and in our submission are really about improving clarity so
that everyone, both landowners
and their advisors know what's going on.
And we think that's a good thing.
So quickly, the, the, the really good parts of the bill,
we wanna commend to you the streamlining
and alignment of the RMA and the PWA.
That's really good that we don't re-litigate
what you might call project design.
Uh, that's been determined already.
The joint projects and the relocation of, of infrastructure,
both of these have been problems in the past
and it's good to see them resolved, uh, in the bill,
the new incentive payments, um,
for non-critical infrastructure projects.
We've seen in only the few months
that the CI payments have been enforced,
how they have really helped see agreements
that might have languished, um, get signed.
And so we think the same will happen for these, these ones
and the new part two B, giving trans power direct access.
We think that's good. Um, as you've heard, we think
that could also be widened to include other parties as well.
So that's the really good stuff that we would commend to you
the areas that we think, uh,
the bill could go further without necessarily changing
the policy settings, but just a few tweaks
to really supercharge the
efficiencies that it would achieve.
We're also conscious here that
although we are spoiled to have had two PWA bills in the
last 12 months, there hasn't been one since 2017 perhaps,
and that was very targeted.
So this is a once in a generational opportunity
to get things right, and we really encourage, uh, you to,
to be that in mind as well.
So the point I wanted to make around access to the,
to the act, I mean,
the act really dates from a time when government
and councils did everything themselves over decades.
Decentralization has meant that just isn't the case.
And so we've got a range of crown entities
and council owned entities
who are actually delivering infrastructure,
but without the statutory tools
that they need to do that effectively.
So we'd like to see that the delegation framework
allows sub delegation within, within someone like NZTA,
who actually sits outside the core public service
or better still expand part two B.
So it's not just trans power,
but it's a range of entities
that are actually doing the work.
Um, like Orion and their other council owned EDBs
and NZTA could be in there as well.
The section 18 notice, which is the first
of the two statutory notices,
new Zealand's an outlier in the world in having this.
Most jurisdictions have abolished it,
and actually the Lins Review said that it should go,
but for some reason it's, it's stayed in there.
One of the curious things is the bill preserves this idea
of registering the notice.
We've never actually seen that achieve anything
except additional work.
And so we would suggest that that part of the,
the bill, uh, not proceed.
And I should just note here,
there's an error in paragraph 3.9 A that should refer
to section 18 two C, not B,
and also the new section 18 a capital A.
Both of those should be, um, amended in our submission
if the process does continue with a section 18 notice.
Then there is some issues that we touched on
around compensation, deceased land owners
and compliance that should be addressed in terms
of compulsory acquisition.
As I said, we support the alignment,
but we think that if we're asking the courts not
to look at alternatives, we need to make that very clear
that alternatives should not form any part
of their consideration so that there's no ability
for the court to slip those in through the back door.
There's some other little language pieces
that could be tidied up in that area as well.
As I said, the the critical infrastructure payments
that came in last year have really made a big difference.
And so it's good to see the additional incentive payment.
There are a few little technical issues around the CI
process in terms of planning approvals
and how notices are served as a interesting new clause
that requires simultaneous service
on a whole range of people.
We just don't think that works.
Um, there's no need for that.
Um, around compensation, there are some, again,
some technical issues around what happens
with multiple owner, multiple title,
multiple parcel acquisitions.
It's really one acquisition and it should get one payment.
Um, but that's not clear at the moment.
There's some issues around GST, um,
that we'd like to see that clarified.
So again, we don't have to have long conversations
with landowners that wastes everyone's time and money.
Clarity is the key here.
The ACT provides for incentives,
but an incentive is when one party wants something
and is happy to pay extra to get it, that
that doesn't make sense.
If the acquirer authority isn't looking to acquire the land
or isn't looking to acquire it quickly,
why should it pay an incentive?
Um, so there's some, some language changes there
to make it clear that the incentive is really
for the acquiring authority to offer
to achieve what it wants.
And then finally, the issue that's
bugging me at the moment on a few files is this issue of
where land is subject to an indemnity
and that the crown would become liable under
that indemnity when it acquires the land.
That seems to trigger a public finance act issue.
Um, and we think that could be easily knocked on the head
with some, uh, careful drafting.
So we'd raise that as a new issue.
Um, but one which is soaked up a lot of time
for both acquiring authorities and landowners.
So those are the key things that I wanted to raise
and they set out in more detail.
And I guess someone might say they all sound quite minor
and nitpicky perhaps,
but these are real examples
where we've seen real issues arise.
It it involves time, cost
and ultimately adds a level of tension
and disputes to a file which might already be contentious.
So we think if these can be stripped away, we we are,
we are making progress faster
and more efficiently, which is the
purpose of the whole exercise.
Uh, thank you. There's, there's so much here,
which is great, and we support it.
Um, and happy to take any questions about
the detail of what we've raised.
Well, thank you, um, Matthew,
and, um, thanks for the, the
detail that you've gone into there.
We've got about two and a bit minutes left.
Are there any questions, uh, that, um, members have got?
It doesn't look like it, so I will, um, just ask you, uh,
I did have one question as we went through the process.
Alright. It's just that one of, um, uh, I,
we've got a simultaneous because now you,
you said it's streamlining in alignment with RMA processes,
uh, where you thought it's good so
that they're not one after the other.
Um, but at the same time, uh, how do we make sure we have,
we had a lot of discussion about this when we had the first
pwa, um, amendment, uh, bill, um, 12 months ago
or so, um, about the process so that if let,
let's take it being a road, for example,
you wanna build a road, um,
and you haven't gone through that requiring, um, process
before, potentially deciding
that it's gonna be these properties
that we're gonna knock on those properties, uh, doors
and say, well, we might, well wanna start the PWA process,
even though that's the requiring process hasn't actually
got very far at all.
And so then potentially comes as a major surprise.
And there hasn't really been a, a conversation
with the community and the affected community about options.
How do we, how do we work those things through?
Yeah, it, it is normal in almost all cases
that you would start with the RMA process
and then go to, to public works.
The courts have recognized that you don't have to do it
that way, but it's by far the, the most common way.
And I guess if I can turn your question
around the other way, if you've already been
through the RMA process and it's been decided
that the route will be this way, that it will be an
that grade road, not a tunnel, then it makes sense
for those questions not
to be real litigated in the Public Works Act.
You don't want individual owners saying, I'm,
I'm, I'm, I'm good with that.
It's more, it's more that we actually have a process
that's a public process that people understand.
They can see the transparency,
that they can see the transparency
of the options which have been considered
and why this particular option, why it happens to be
that their land is, is affected by that.
Um, that's clear.
But if you had the two of them entirely in parallel,
that process wouldn't have been, um, understood
by the affected landowners. That's,
That's, that's why I've asked the question.
Yeah. So it's unusual. They run entirely in parallel and
Yes. So what you're saying,
it's
not impossible, I suppose, isn't it? Even
Not impossible, I suppose even not impossible, but yeah,
quite a, quite a luck.
I think that will do, that's helpful for me. Thank you.
Really appreciate it. Thank you very much. Thank you. Right.
Have we got so district back in the Yep. In the room. Right.
Okay. We'll, we will, um, go back to your worship.
Have you got this the support team now?
Yeah, no, look, it's um, it, it's gonna be me.
I'll hold the fort here. Oh,
Oh. Well, you,
we'll, we'll try not
to get too many technical questions in.
If there are, you can say, well, I'll,
I can answer those later on or get, oh, there you go.
It's perfect timing. Right. Okay.
Well, um, the time is yours.
Um, and, uh, you do now have the, uh, the support there.
So, um, away we go.
Cool. Thank you very much.
Oh, well, thank you for having us.
Um, and, and for the opportunity, um, look,
we really support the intent of this bill, uh,
and the government's objective to modernize the PWA.
Uh, and you know, this is not new, uh, for you,
but with Selwyn being one
of the fastest growing districts in, um, New Zealand,
we are experiencing significant infrastructure demand across
transport, flood protection, water services
and community facilities
and efficient land acquisition processes are critical
to keeping up with that growth
and delivering, um, resilience and infrastructure.
I think, you know, it's a bit of a principle.
Principled position is, um, you know,
supporting the reforms.
It's improving, um, certainty, timeliness,
and efficiency, uh, which I, I think,
uh, everyone nearly agrees with.
Uh, but it's the reform that needs to balance speed
with a bit of democratic legit legitimacy.
Sorry, I'm losing my words this morning. Transparency.
And to me, it's the fairness for landowners as well,
and getting that balance right is essential for,
um, maintaining public trust.
Um, you know, land acquisition can be quite, um, painful
or, or a surprise at times to some landowners, um,
if they're not aware of, uh, what needs to happen.
Um, but since, uh, Rob is online, I will hand over to Rob
and he can talk about, um, actually
what are the specific elements, um, in the submission
and how that actually looks on the ground for us around, um,
transitional provisions and the emergency response pathway.
Um, so Rob, if you're there, happy to hand over to you,
Your honor.
Um, look,
council is supportive the overall direction of the bill.
Uh, we welcome the greater flexibility
for urgent infrastructure delivery, improved use
of digital tools, incentives, encouraging early agreement,
and minimizing delay.
In fact, in some of the current PWA processes
to acquire land for roading transactions, we find
that landowners, uh, consultants are requesting
that provisions be put in the documentation, um, to say
that if the legislation is passed, they will receive
the upgraded compensation 10%.
So it's already happening by default.
It's, uh, to progress matters forward
before we have to issue, uh, a section 23 notice.
Uh, we note that not all challenges are legislation related.
Resourcing and implementation also matter.
Um, the, the key issues, our main request is clarity
around any transitional provisions.
We are seeking certainty on whether existing acquisitions
can transition into new pathways, how compensation
and incentives apply,
where agreements are partially progressed.
But with reference to what I just said earlier,
where the counters can opt into amended processes
for projects already underway, poorly staged transitions,
create risk, delay,
and unnecessary rework recommendations,
um, we believe that an explosive, uh, an explicit
opt-out clause for projects underway would be useful.
A mandatory three year statutory review consistent
with the critical infrastructure
and amendments emergency response pathway,
we support the introduction
of an emergency response pathway and principle.
Recent extreme weather events highlight the need for a fit
for purpose recovery tool.
We support activation within two years of a declared state
of emergency reducing negotiation time from three months
to one month relaxed survey requirements where appropriate
a 10% compensation incentive
to encourage early agreement safeguards.
The proposed pathway removes several safeguards
that were present under the severe weather
emergency recovery legislation.
Swer key concerns include emergency powers applying
to any declared state of emergency,
no prescribed engagement process prior
to an order in council, reducing reporting requirements,
limited appeal rights,
and no environment court hearing
without appropriate safeguards.
There is heavy reliance on ministerial discretion
recommendation, reintroduce engagement
review, and reporting safeguards similar to the intent
of swer to maintain public confidence.
In summary, council supports modernization
and improved delivery tools.
Our primary request is clarity
and practical transitional provisions,
and we encourage safeguards that maintain fairness,
transparency, and public trust. Kira, thank you.
Thank you very much. And that's good timing.
We've got, uh, about four and a half minutes left.
Uh, questions, colleagues, Tangi.
Thank you. Um, Mr. Chair, thank you to you both.
Just in terms of the emergency pathway, you've sort
of cited the example of, of Swer
and I guess, you know, the, the difference
between what's in this bill
and that bill, it could be argued as, you know,
around efficiency, but you, you've mentioned the, the need
for the bill to look at what the engagement as part of
that emergency pathway would look like.
Are you suggesting that it, that ideally it's a lift
and shift from what Swer was,
or do you have some other thoughts about trying
to strike a a fair balance?
Uh, from, from the information I've received,
I think it's a lift and shift in reality.
Great. Thanks. Okay. Other questions?
Can I just ask one question, um, of you
and that that's the two years that you, um, suggested,
I dunno if you were online, when, um,
water New Zealand was speaking, um,
and they suggested the six, well, they suggested that, um,
that, uh, two years is some,
it's not gonna be enough in many instances.
An example, they gave us the situation, whereas for a,
as let's say a, a water pipe of some sort, uh, is attached
to a bridge, bridge gets damaged in a, uh,
in a severe weather event.
Um, the roading road controlling authority decides
ultimately not to replace the bridge, or,
or in some cases I'm seeing that happen here, um,
doesn't want something attached to their bridge.
Um, and then the water entity has to go
and find a new pathway.
And the two years then doesn't give them time to do that,
even though it's still responsible, uh,
it's still a response to a, an earthquake.
Uh, got a view on that. How hard
and fast are you on that two years?
Uh, look, I can understand
that those timeframes can be pushed out.
So I do agree with them at the various circumstances that
that can imply in those sort of situations.
So not too hard and fast.
Okay. That's helpful, thank you. Right.
I think that is us. Thank you very much.
And, um, you worship.
Look forward to seeing you again this afternoon.
Yeah, See you this afternoon. Cool, cool, cool. Okay.
Uh, we have, uh, the Electricity Engineers Association
of New Zealand just, um, colleagues, they're,
they're down start at 10 35.
Do you wanna break at any stage
or do you just wanna keep on boxing through,
keep on next box
Through if we can, to 1130 Boxing through.
We'll do that. Carry on. Okay.
So we've got the electricity engineers of, uh,
New Zealand on their way in.
Sorry, can you, Oh, is that Stuart?
Yes, it is. Okay, Stuart, lovely to have you here.
Um, we've got your submission, which you can take as read.
Um, if you wanna highlight anything from it, please do.
Uh, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, and, um, I will give you a call
with about four minutes to go.
Often. I'm writing so furiously
that I forget the four minutes
and then it ends up being three.
But, um, I will try and, uh, make sure I don't do that.
So, um, your time, um, starts now.
Uh, thank you very much
for the opportunity to appear today.
Uh, my name is Dr. Stuart Johnson
and I'm speaking on behalf
of the Electricity Engineers Association of New Zealand.
We appreciate the committee's consideration
of our submission on Public Works Amendment bill,
but why have the brief context?
Uh, the EEA is the technical
and professional body of the New
Zealand's electricity sector.
Our members span transmission, distribution generation,
engineering consultancies, uh, equipment supplies
and specialist service providers.
We also focus on the practical system level realities of,
of delivering safe, reliable,
and resilient electricity infrastructure across New Zealand.
We are particularly interested in this bill
because of the Public Works Act is a critical enabler
for the timely delivery of substations lines
and cables that underpin electrification, housing growth,
and regional development.
At the outset, the EEA supports the overall
direction and intent of the bill.
We see the modernization of the Public Works act
as both necessary
and timely, particularly as electrification accelerates
and infrastructure delivery becomes more complex
and more interdependent across sectors.
From our perspective, the act as a key enabler of timely
electricity infrastructure investment
that underpins housing,
industrial development, and regional growth.
Our submission is therefore not about
changing the policy direction.
Rather it's about ensuring the framework works effectively
in practice for critical electricity infrastructure
and supports good system level outcomes.
In particular, we are focused on the relocation settings,
alignment across regimes
and access to appropriate statutory tools.
The most important point we wish to emphasize relates
to the infrastructure relocation From an electricity network
perspective, relocation is rarely a simple
matter of shifting assets.
In many cases, it requires new assets, engineering redesign,
network reconfiguration,
and careful staging to maintain safety capacity
and reliability obligations that are,
are placed upon the electricity industry.
This reflects the reality
that electricity networks are interconnected systems
rather than standalone assets.
If the bill does not provide clear
and certain cost recovery,
those costs will ultimately be born by electricity consumers
and may also create inefficient investment
signals across the system.
We therefore recommend that the bill make ex explicit
a simple and well-established principle
where infrastructure is required to be relocated
to enable another party's public's work.
Public work, the full efficient cost should be met
by the party requiring it.
We also encourage the committee
to ensure the bill aligns cleanly with the electricity act,
particularly in re in relation to cost allocation
and the treatment of betterment
to avoid unintended in inconsistencies
between the two regimes.
In, in terms of other areas that we were looking at,
around access powers
and resilience, we support the intent
of the combined projects provisions,
noting their success will depend on clear accountability
and cost allocation in practice,
it is also important to recognize
that distribution networks are becoming an increasingly
critical enabler of New Zealand's future generation mix
across many part of the coun, many parts of the country,
increasing volumes of new generation, particularly solar
batteries and some wind, but also household, um, d
or distributed energy resources are connecting directly
to distributed networks rather than transmission,
and are gonna become more and more critical for the,
for the, the running of the system.
In many regions, the energy transition will land first
on distribution networks.
Against that backdrop, we note the proposal
to provide trans power with specific statutory powers.
From a system perspective,
distribution networks face a very similar
and increasingly material land access challenges,
particularly for new substations needed
to support load growth
and the connection of new generation subject
to appropriate safeguards and governance.
We encourage the committee to,
to consider whether equivalent tools, uh,
should be available to other critical electricity network
providers across the system.
Relatedly requiring authority status should not operate
as a practical barrier where nationally significant
infrastructure delivery is involved.
Finally, we would like to also highlight,
we strongly support the move
to a more standardized emergency recovery framework.
As shown for by recent, uh, events across the country, uh,
electricity networks are lifeline infrastructure
and clear, um, clearer emergency powers will materially
improve resilience outcomes for,
for all, all parties involved.
So, um, it was only a very shortened and sweet thing,
but in closing, I'd like
to go back over the EEA supports the direction of the bill,
but with, with targeted refinements, particularly
around the relocation cost at clarity, alignment
with the electricity act
and equitable access to key tools,
it can be a stronger strong enabler
of the infrastructure investment New Zealand needs.
And thank you very, um, much for the opportunity to present
and I'm happy to take questions.
Thank you, Stuart. We'll just
see what questions there are.
Okay, look, I've got, uh, a couple, um, the first one
of 'em is e Um, so you are recommending that EDB um,
distribution networks have essentially the same, uh,
abilities, uh, bestowed on them
as is proposed for trans power?
Yes, that's correct. Okay.
And, um, we've had, uh,
I dunno if you heard the submission earlier today from
Orion, uh, who suggested that that should, um, apply
to those which are owned by councils
as opposed to those which are private.
Do you have a view on that
and that that was around the reporting requirements?
Um, uh, I, I, I see the point from Orion
and I actually, um, uh, support it to a,
to a degree, but I also think there should
be a consistency across the board.
So I don't, I don't, um, uh,
I think if you're gonna do it for one, you do it for all.
Okay. That's, that's very helpful.
Uh, that might be something that, uh, we have a,
if we do go down that track that we have
to have a look at the reporting requirements
to see if anything needs to be done, uh,
in that particular situation.
The second question is around the, um, so
what you're talking about the, the relocation costs, you,
you're talking about the situation where you have, um,
in this case electrical infrastructure, which, um,
is required to be moved by somebody else, presumably
for public work as opposed to non-public work.
Um, and are you seeing situations at the moment where, uh,
the, that's being required
but the electricity entity is not being fully compensated
for the, the cost of putting the system back together again?
Yes, that has, has occurred.
Um, uh, so it's been for potentially for road, um, uh,
new roads going in.
It's been, um, with the examples which I've been, uh, made,
made aware of by some of our members.
Um, uh,
but there is other, other aspects, other, uh, parts
where there's, there's been other infrastructure
that's going in or, or something has to be moved.
Um, and the EDBs have not, um, uh,
have had to to, to front some of those costs.
Okay. Um, and look, one other question if I can,
and it's with respect to, um,
'cause of course at the moment, EDBs are not requiring
authorities, neither is trans power.
So you don't have the same powers that, for example,
the NZTA has.
Um, the situation where, and,
and particularly in some of our more remote areas, EDBs say,
well, look, we we're putting our,
our lines through somebody's forest.
Um, you know, there's no compensation to the landowner, uh,
particularly for historic ones.
And now because the trees falling on the lines,
we now want you to, um, set the forest back
a considerable distance.
Um, which of course means that the,
the landowner essentially can't get any
value outta that land at all.
Does that seem fair?
Uh, that's an interesting one.
It's, uh, that, so
also goes the other way too, where a, a lion's been there
for a long period of time and then someone on a private
property has, uh, planted a forest
around that. So it's come up,
Oh, that's, that's different. I'm talking about the
other way around
And Saying we, we want more, we want more
of your land effectively to keep the trees
away from our, our lines.
So going from an Australian perspective, um, where
that actually happens and you have to take some of the trees
that are away from the easement area, then, uh, the, uh,
the DNSP over there does pay compensation.
Now it's, it's, it's, uh, but it is,
and or, or in other places.
It depends on how, what it is.
It's, it's a shared cost, um, between the, between them.
So there is, uh, it's not expected that just the, the, the,
the, the, um, one party would
pay and the other one wouldn't.
However, if it was actually with, if the,
the trees were planted within the, the encroachment, uh,
the natural encroachment area,
then it's fully the responsibility of the, of the part
of the, of the property owner. Yeah.
No, that's appreciated. Look, thank you.
That is very good. Much appreciated.
And we are bang on time. Alright, so thank
You. Thank you very much.
Right. Okay, we have the New Zealand telecommunications,
uh, forum who are here in person.
Thank Kim. Welcome.
Thank you Chair and morning Koto.
Good morning. Uh, so I'm the policy director
for the New Zealand Telecommunications Forum.
Um, we are the industry association for the telco sector,
so our members build
and operate telecommunications infrastructure and networks.
Um, before I get going though, I'd just like
to acknowledge the hard work of all the officials
and folks who've worked on the bill.
I think sometimes we forget to say thank you.
Uh, we weren't one of the members who, um, one of the, um,
parties involved in the preliminary consultations,
but we're really happy to have the chance to,
to speak to the bill today.
Um, Mr. Chair, you would've seen from our submission,
we are broadly supportive of the bill,
but we do have some concerns
and some suggestions about the relocation
of infrastructure affected by public works.
So a similar theme, similar thing to, uh,
the previous submitter.
Um, but seriously though, this is an important issue
for our sector because relocating telco infrastructure
to accommodate another party's project is a really complex
and a very expensive exercise.
Um, as the previous submitter said, it isn't, um,
a simple lift and shift, um, for telecommunications.
We are normally going to need new assets, um,
for the new location and it can be really hard
to find a suitable site, especially when we are competing
with other infrastructure such as electricity
for a space in the road corridor.
Uh, there are also network design
and regulatory elements that we need to, to meet, such
as spaces for radio frequency.
Um, of course there's the usual consenting hurdles, um,
and then there'll be costs for, you know, for earthworks
and construction and whatnot.
Um, but the good news is that the policy makers, um,
have thought about the impacts of relocating infrastructure
with that clarified process that we see in clause 15.
Um, but they just haven't thought of everything.
Um, and there's a couple of gaps I'd like
to talk about this morning and these concern, uh,
compensation for network utility operators when they do need
to relocate infrastructure
and also the scope of the network utility operators
who can take part in this new clarified relocation process.
I'll cover compensation issues first.
Um, as you know, the bill enables affected landowners
to be compensated when infrastructure needs to be moved, um,
because of a public work.
And that's fair and and reasonable,
but what it doesn't do is enable network utility operators
to make claims for compensation when they're required, uh,
to relocate their infrastructure,
which has also been affected by a public work.
Um, so what we are proposing in our submission, um,
is the bill make it explicit, uh, that
where infrastructure is required to relocate
because of a public work, then the full cost
of the relocation should be covered by the party
that's requiring it.
Uh, turning now to the question of scope.
Um, our reading of the bill is
that only enables network utility operators
who are requiring authorities under the RMA
to take part in this new efficient relocation process.
And the difficulty with this is
that all network utility operators, not just those
who are requiring authorities, can be impacted
by a public works acquisition.
And we are envisaging some complications that could arise
where you might have a co-location at a site
where not all parties are requiring authority.
Um, so for example, as we pointed out a submission,
we might have a site
where we've got chorus providing back haul fiber
and we might have a cell tower.
One party might be requiring authority, the other isn't.
And when that happens, then
what we'd envisage is there'd be two
relocation processes happening.
One on the fast track, but one on the usual slow track.
And we think that would slow down your Public works project,
which would defeat the policy intent.
And to address this, our suggestion is
to amend the definition
of responsible network utility operator, uh,
to remove the requiring authority element.
And the last submission point I'd like
to highlight this morning concerns the land acquisition
powers that have been proposed by trans power, uh, sorry
for trans power, uh, in part two B, um, similar
to the previous submitter, we are asking
that telecommunications also be given the same power
to initiate land acquisition, um, processes directly
like trans powertel,
telecommunication network operators provide essential
utilities, uh, that communities and businesses rely on.
So really this is an equity argument, um,
extending these powers
to other network utility authorities would help us all
to able to deliver our projects efficiently and equitably.
So thank you for your time and attention.
Happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. Um, we've got about five minutes left,
so, uh, colleagues questions.
Can I ask Kim a couple then?
Um, first one of 'em is just in terms of telecommunications,
which organizations are wrapped up in
as telecommunications providers?
Yeah, so our, our members are quite a wide
range. So we'll have, um,
That's kind of why I'm asking is I, I
'cause you're asking for some expanded powers.
Yes. How many, how many organizations are you,
are you asking that for and,
and what's the scale of the range and the nature of those?
Yeah, um, so for example, um,
there's the fixed line providers.
So your fiber networks all around the country.
Um, chorus and the local fiber companies like, uh, enable
and UA tahi, um, there's those companies.
Then there are the mobile network operators, um,
who now team up with tower companies who own,
pretty much own most of their tower infrastructure.
Yeah. So this would be about putting say,
fiber optic cables in the ground, um,
and when those need to be moved.
Um, and it's also when cell towers need to be moved.
So towers
and lines, I mean the towers,
you usually got a reasonable degree of, well,
not complete flexibility.
There is a degree of flexibility as to where you can put,
Well, there's limited, you say there's very,
there's very limited flexibility
because of the resource management rules.
Um, so if a tower does need to be moved, there's gonna be
relatively, you know, a small number of options, um, on
where it needs to move to.
Um, and then there'll be processes that we've got to go
through, you know, with the community
as well who'll have an interest in these issues.
So it is quite an involved process when we have to move,
Um, with the lines, uh, underground.
Same as we heard with you might have,
dunno if you heard the water
submission earlier, for example.
We've got a lot of lines which are underground,
underground in that situation.
By and large telecommunications lines
that could be under that could be over.
So, yeah, so most part under,
You don't actually need the land itself, do you?
So so you already asking to acquire an
easement if you need that or,
Yeah, so for the most part,
telecommunications companies don't own the land, um,
where their infrastructure is located.
Okay. So it's mostly, so it's mostly the ability, the same
as the likes of trans power, the ability to be able
to compulsory require the easement
And Yeah. In most
cases, yes.
But, but in some cases though,
there may be the need to acquire that.
Okay. And um, and we are asking, I mean, most of our members
will not try to use the Public Works process,
you know, wherever possible.
Um, you know, that's not a process that is the go-to, um,
but we're just asking for that process to be available
where it is sort of is needed.
Okay. And just go, going back to the towers, my, um,
recollection is that the, there was a change in, oh,
I'm gonna say about 2011, 12, something like that,
where cell towers were able
to be put essentially anywhere in Road Reserve, um,
was just there, it was became
controlled activity from memory.
Yeah, it's, um, it's a very complicated process.
It's covered by the National Environmental Standards
for telecommunications facilities,
which are regulations under the Resource Management Act
and they have very, um, prescribed rules.
Um, but you are right chair that does
allow some permitted activities in some parts
of the road reserve, um, in some areas.
Yeah. Yeah. 'cause I guess I I,
I'd start feeling a little bit uncomfortable if you said,
oh, we just decided to plunk cell towers wherever you want
to within pri with what's, you know,
say residential commercial land.
If you have the road reserve already available to you,
Um, the Road reserve is available under certain rules.
Yes. Yeah. But that's, you understand that
that's a very different proposition than being able
to compulsory acquire land.
It is. You have more choice. Absolutely.
You know, private land. Okay. Anything else Tony? We do,
Um, just the final part in your written submission is
around the section 40 offer back provisions
and you sort of noted that wasn't included because of time.
We could pick that one up with the officials.
Um, but I sense what you're asking
for is a comment if it's out of scope, um,
from this committee and its report back to just sort
of say this is something that needs
to be looked at at some point in the future
'cause of efficiencies, the need
to get some more efficiencies.
Yes, that's, um, that's correct.
Um, you know, an example for us, um,
where an efficiency would be very useful is, um,
one telecommunications company may have some land
that was acquired under the Public Works Act historically,
um, being able to transfer that
to another telecommunications company, you know,
for example, it may have been acquired by Telecom
and then we've got Chorus and Spark separated
and we're now using Tower companies.
Being able to transfer that land to the, the telco
that's now operating the network on
that site would be a really useful thing to be able to
Do.
Thank you. Just on that, are you,
are you considered to be public works?
We can use the Public Works Act. Okay. Right. Okay, cool.
Um, but as I mentioned before, try not to.
Okay. I understand that that's different than you whether
you can use it as opposed to that you are considered
to be a public work in terms of the wider def,
wider definitions of those, I'd have to look at the PWA
and just see who is
Yeah, you might need to get your
officials to advise on that.
I think we would. I think we'll ask em. Yeah.
Just one quickly, I don't have Bill with me.
Have you ever used it? Um, some
of our members have used it,
but most of these are historical acquisitions.
Yeah. Okay, Kim,
thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Yeah, thanks for your time. Thank you.
Okay, we are boxing on, we have Auckland Council also
with us on Zoom
hopefully, but you said that they're here.
Oh, just coming in.
Good. Okay. Take, can you see and hear us?
Good morning. I can see you.
I can see a shadowy figure in the back,
which I presume is Leticia.
Um, you might wanna come
bit closer to the Oh, that's better.
I can see you both. Alright. Right. Brilliant. Okay.
Um, look, it's great. Thank you.
Um, we've got a couple of us here in the room.
We've got a couple, uh, on, we've got others, other members
of the committee on Zoom.
Um, so we're all here to listen to you.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
Take your submission as read, uh,
but if you want to highlight elements, that'd be great.
And I'll give you a call at about four to go if we're, uh,
if you're still going, um, just in case, uh,
you wanna allow some time for questions,
which we always like to ask.
So your time starts now.
Thank you. I'm Barry Poland, council's, uh, director of,
uh, resilience and infrastructure.
And with me is Leticia Edwards, who's, uh, council's head
of optimization, acquisitions and disposals.
Um, so as you noted, we, uh,
represent Auckland Council and speaking.
We'll speak very briefly to the, uh, submission on, uh,
public, uh, works Amendment bill, which was, uh, signed
by Mayor Wayne Brown.
And Councilor Hills is the Chair
of Council's Policy Planning and Development Committee.
And, uh, rather me taking out the time, I'll hand over
to Leticia, we'll speak briefly to it
and then, uh, take questions.
Uh, Leticia, thank you. Good,
Thank you Barry. And
thank you very much for the opportunity
to present to you today.
Uh, we would just like to outline the key points, uh,
of importance to Auckland Council and our feedback today.
Firstly, the we note
that the bill has focused on streamlining,
streamlining Public Works Act acquisitions.
This is something that Auckland Council supports,
but we submit that a substantive review
of the public work set is required, particularly in relation
to the disposal and offer back provisions which are
frequently the subject of litigation
and increasingly complex case law.
Uh, the increasingly complex case law
and disposals processes creates inefficiencies
and adds considerable delays
and costs to Auckland Council's public works
divestment processes.
Uh, with respect to the emergency response pathway,
Auckland Council sup supports, uh,
the emergency response pathway set,
set out in the bill is these changes will streamline
processes and its media, the remediation
and restoration of public works where a state
of emergency has been declared.
However, we propose
that the timeframe timeframe be increased, uh, to up
to six years from the proposed, uh, two,
as the investigation of infrastructure options
for remediation and recovery, including the identification
of any land and associated budgets may
take longer than two years.
Auckland Council will also support the Public Works Act,
amend, uh, enabling a more proactive approach
to mitigating climate change or potential natural hazards
and natural disasters,
including proactive acquisition pathways.
With respect to urban renewal, Auckland Council submits
that urban renewal should be formally
provided for as a public work within the legislative
framework to better support
and enable local authorities
to achieve integrated development, growth, and housing.
Auckland Council also submits and has
provided a proposed updated definition of urban renewal
as the current definition is from 1974.
These proposed changes will support
and enable improved outcomes to be realized in
and around other public works, such as when land is acquired
for roading purposes and to enable land acquisition
and designation processes to operate in a coordinated manner
with respect to the proposed compensation
and incentive payments.
Auckland Council supports this in, in principle,
but notes that it may not materially influence, uh,
early acquisition for commercial
or high value, uh, properties.
Auckland Council also submits the incentive payments may
likely impose additional costs on local authorities while
rates caps are being, uh, proposed, uh,
which would constrain local authorities' ability
to meet additional costs from the incentive payments
incurred from the incentive payments.
Auckland Council also submits
that the incentive payments should be indexed to CPI, uh,
just due to the, uh, potential inflationary impacts
that will occur over time.
And with respect to the, uh, public works
critical infrastructure amend, uh, amendment, uh, at 2025
that has now passed, we would propose that this be expanded
to include essential services which local authorities are
legislatively required to deliver such as cemeteries.
Uh, those are the key aspects of our submission.
We're happy to take any questions.
Thank you very much, uh, really appreciate that.
Um, questions, colleagues? No one. Okay.
I'll take Simon this time then. Tangi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Hi Barry. Hi Leticia. Hi Simon.
Really interested in your, um, suggestion that urban
renewal be, be updated or included in a wider definition.
Are there particular projects
or programs that you think would benefit, uh, from
allowing Auckland Council
or, uh, water care to acquire land
through public works provisions?
Yes, thank you very much.
Uh, there are particular projects, uh,
we are thinking mainly in and around transport nodes.
So this would enable, uh, greater density to be achieved in
and around transport nodes.
Of course, we are trying to plan for that
through plan Change one 20.
Uh, but this would enable, uh, local authorities
to take a more proactive, um, approach.
Uh, so as well as, uh, planning
for such activities we could also, uh,
proactively enable them to occur.
It would also enable when we are designating land,
for example, for a transport purpose, for us
to undertake a dual designation process.
Okay. Um, so just thinking about this opportunity
that that potentially that we have most city rail lake
and we still lots of, um, undeveloped land around there.
We think about the next project like North West Rapid
Transit and North Oakland, um, potentially redevelopments
around the harbor crossing.
Do you think that is the opportunity for, uh,
Brooklyn council or local government
to actually acquire the land?
But then what is the development opportunity?
I mean, are you suggesting
that Auckland Council would then be building houses
or where does the development part come in?
Sure, that's a really good question.
So when we have utilized, uh,
and we have utilized urban renewal as a public work in some
of our other, um, projects,
albeit we're relying on the local government, uh, at 1974,
uh, we control the outcomes on the way through.
So they're delivered by the private sector.
But Auckland Council has re uh, retained control
until the completion of the, uh, outcomes, which is, uh,
essential outcomes which are set out in
the development agreements.
So, so we control the outcomes that way rather than through,
um, undertaking the, uh, development work ourselves.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank you both.
Just to comment about, um, your suggestion
that the incentive payments need to be indexed, is
that simply because, I mean,
parliament doesn't usually review this piece of legislation
for quite some time.
Um, how would you see that mechanism working just by way
of an ordering council through regulations?
Uh, we would see it working, uh, through say, a provision
that it'd be linked to CPI.
So that's an agreed figure.
And because you're quite right, uh,
parliament doesn't review, uh, acts such
as the Public Works Act very often.
So if we wait another 40 years
or approximately 40 years for a review,
a hundred thousand dollars will be worth a lot less in
20, 30, 40 years time than it's today.
So it won't have the sort of power
or ability to, um, influence the, um,
positively influence the acquisition processes in the future
that would in the current, um, or in the present.
Thank you. Can I have another Yeah. Question.
Um, we've already heard from one council today about the
process of accountability in, uh,
utilizing the emergency response pathway
and they cited swirl the previous legislation around,
you know, panel of MPS
and what have you, not just relying fully on ministerial,
um, decision making.
Do, do you think, like where does,
where does the balance lie in terms of accountability
but also not delaying the need to basically be able
to get things underway,
particularly in an emergency setting?
Uh, we would support streamlining, uh, the processes
as much as possible in an emergency setting
because they're just, that they're in an,
an emergency setting.
So you would Like to move quickly
to support our communities
and, um, enable positive outcomes.
So are you comfortable that as it stands,
it would just be over to the minister to make
that determination as opposed to having some form of
for want Abe word consultation?
I, I think that's the case in, um, an emergency situation.
Um, we are very quick responses are required, uh, that
that would be the, uh, better way to progress with
Everything. Thank you. I think
It's carrying that on, isn't it?
The issue with how long an emergency situation lasts?
Oh, an extent. An extension. Extension, yeah. Extent.
Okay. Um, but can I just ask one question?
We've got about a minute left. Um, just in terms
of urban renewal, the suggestion you're making is,
you'll put the, the bit that I've just sort
of raised my eyebrows a little bit about is
that you've taken from the existing, which is an urban part
of the district, and now you've gone to urban
or future Urban, um, if that,
that could be interesting
because the,
the valuation on future urban who's capturing the value
and so on will be an interesting proposition.
Why did you put future urban in there?
That's a very good question.
Uh, to be honest, we didn't give a great deal of thought to,
um, capturing any
or any value capture from, um, uplifting, um, you know,
zonings that may occur.
Uh, we were thinking purely along the lines
of places like Drury, where Auckland councilors working,
where we are seeking to, um, work with the private sector
to achieve basically a new satellite town.
And we were wanting to have the same powers, uh,
to work in those greenfields locations, uh, that, um,
we have identified for future urban, uh, purposes
as we would in existing urban areas
That would then put some pretty significant, um,
onus on any council in terms of the, the process
that they've gone through to identify
those future urban areas.
Wouldn't it, and I dunno, yes,
how extensive your process has been,
but I, you know, obviously we're looking at laws for,
for every council, so that would be an interesting one.
Yes. Yes, it would. Yes it would.
And, and look, we did,
we did initially have two different
definitions, uh, proposed.
Uh, there was a working group, um,
as we've noted in our submission,
there was a cross council working group that, uh,
pulled the submission together.
We did have, uh, two definitions proposed, one
for existing urban areas, one for future urban areas.
Uh, we found it quite confusing ourselves
trying to submit on the two.
So we thought that we, uh, would streamline it, um,
and recommend one definition.
Uh, but we are, we are open to this being further debated,
um, and considered we, the, the main point of our, um,
proposal is that we get similar powers to what,
or we would like similar powers to
what Ang Aura has in the, um,
uh, sorry, in the Urban Development Act, which are available
to Kang a but not to Auckland council
or other local authorities.
Okay. We'll, um, we'll give some thought to that.
If, if, if, uh, you can actually forward us through the, um,
alternative, um, uh, suggestions
that you were cogitating on, that might be useful as well.
Fantastic. Will do. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Right.
That takes us to, we don't have the law association
yet, including not person.
Um, we've got two submitters to go.
Um, so we've got Don McDonald worry on Zoom
and the Law Association
of New Zealand tour are coming in person,
but they are not yet here.
Their, their time doesn't start for seven minutes yet, so,
um, they could well be on their way.
So Dr. McDonald worry, we got you there.
Good morning. Nice to see you again,
Kiata. How's it going?
Good. We are, uh, we we're going well.
We've got, uh, you down for five minutes, um, uh,
and um, we've got your submission, you know,
the usual, the usual drill.
I'll give you a call with about two minutes to go, um,
just in case there are questions just,
but, uh, the time is yours.
Um, so my concerns with this bill, um,
come from a perspective of, uh, rights
and some of them going back quite fair way
to the Magna Carta
and Petition of Rights 1627, um,
that taking away people's land is a very significant thing
for governments to do, especially without due process.
And there are elements in this bill
where you're taking away people's right to their day
of court, their day in court, to challenge, um,
what could be arbitrary
and potentially corrupt abuses
of executive power in taking their land.
Uh, the other major issue is equality before the law.
Uh, there are differences here
in the way Maori land is treated compared to other land,
and I don't begrudge, um, the extra protections given
to Maori land, but that should probably be extended
and have as much the quality of treatment
between different land types.
We've had previous submitters on this morning talking about
planning around blocks of Maori land.
So we are potentially not getting the best, um, route
for a piece of infrastructure in the public interest, um,
if it's avoiding Maori land.
And we should have a more open
and transparent negotiation process as a community, um,
with adequate compensation.
And you might get a more direct route if you're treating,
um, different landowners, um, more equally
and more permanent and durable and sensible solution.
Um, I've also proposed my recommendation, some kind of right
of return being explicit in some of this legislation.
So if more land is taken or land is taken
and the project doesn't go ahead,
the original owners have the right
to buy it back at the same price, um, they were paid
for it or something similar.
Um, the balance of the remaining land, um,
or the entire land of the project doesn't go ahead
or circumstances change.
Um, and that would be a shield against, um,
extra land being taken and then potentially corrupt
or insider trading where the balance of the land is given to
for other purposes, um,
taken away from the original landowner.
Um, yeah, the emergency powers are also
concerning the very broad definition of emergency powers.
Are we dealing with a temporary fix which probably could be
done under other legislation
or done in a fairly arbitrary fashion
and then sort out compensation afterwards
and work out a more permanent fix,
or are we gonna get permanent infrastructure changes being
rushed through, um, under the cover of an emergency decree?
And we can have situations where emergencies are, um,
exaggerated, um,
and executive branches take opportunities to rush things
through, um, in the context of, uh,
declared emergency things
that they would've wanted to do otherwise.
Okay. Got just under two minutes, uh, to go. Yeah.
Happy to answer questions.
Are there any questions? Doesn't look like it,
so not Dr.
Donald worry. Thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Good to see you again. Okay.
Take us to our final submitter for the day.
For morning, I should say for the day
Morning, uh, Law association person, Phil.
Hi, Andy. Hi.
We've got, um, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
You can usual rules, so, um, you can take your submission
as read, but we always appreciate any um,
key points you wanna make, and, uh, leaving some time
for questions will be great.
Uh, and I'll give you a call
with about four minutes to go, so give you time.
Thanks. Thanks. Now, uh,
I'm here on behalf of the Law Association.
Uh, I practice in the area of, uh, public works, about 10%
of my, um, my legal practice.
Uh, I thought I would just quickly go through the key, um,
points in the, uh, written summary that we provided.
Um, just wanted to acknowledge that, you know, I'm, I, I'm,
I'm very much personally in favor of infrastructure.
I think we all are acknowledge the importance
of delivering infrastructure efficiently, um,
but also well aware that Public Works Act requires, um,
in my view an entire rewrite.
But, um, it's, it's 1928 legislation
that was updated in 1981,
and I think it's just been, um,
amended piecemeal since then.
I'm actually representing the public law committee,
so there's a strong flavor of constitutional law.
And, um, I think one of the, some, one of the, um,
key points we wanted to make was that we, we thought
that whilst we're in favor of, um,
infrastructure delivery being efficient,
and, um, infrastructure is desperately needed, um, we,
we took the overall view
that the balance has been shifted too far by the amendment,
um, too far towards speed and executive power
and, uh, uh, away from independent oversight, uh,
of the courts and procedural element of
procedural fairness issue.
Uh, so we, we, we, we considered at the end of the day that
that was a shift in constitutional balance.
Um, and compulsory acquisition, without doubt is one
of the most intrusive powers that the state can exercise.
Um, so, you know,
it's legitimacy depends on robust safeguards, um,
transparency and access to independent review.
Uh, our concern is that taken cumulatively,
the reforms represent a material shift away from those
safeguards, uh, towards an expanded executive discretion
without, uh, within sufficient compensating protections.
Uh, key issue is the narrowing
of objection and appeal rights.
Um, the bill limits the role of the Environment court
with regard to critical infrastructure, uh,
including restricting, uh, the ability, uh,
of consideration of alternative sites and methods, uh,
and methods, um, where a designation exists.
Um, and some, um, cases
independent oversight is removed entirely, uh, replaced
with submissions, um, to land information New Zealand,
uh, arguably to the decision maker
that may be promoting the project, uh,
that raises clear concerns around natural justice,
perceived bias and conflicts of interest.
I think one of the things I particularly identified that,
uh, there's a provision which says the environment court
must not undertake undertaken inquiry
if there is a designation in, uh,
certain critical infrastructure projects.
Um, and the view of our committee, um,
and the, um, association is that independent scrutiny,
scrutiny is not a procedural luxury.
It's fundamental to maintaining public co confidence.
Uh, I, we also raised issues around the expansion
of emergency powers.
Um, also, um, looked at,
uh, acquisition powers of, uh, state owned enterprises
impacts on Mari land,
and they're all very important aspects.
But the, um, one thing I, I, I guess the other thing
that we, we, well, the two things I think we wanted to,
to focus on in particular was the removal
of the environment courts, uh, jurisdiction,
and, uh, the introduction of mandatory
alternative dispute resolution.
Uh, we, we, we, we take the view
that alternative dispute resolution can be useful,
making it mandatory,
however, risks delaying access
to independent determinations, such as the Environment Court
and potentially the Land Valuation Tribunal, uh,
particularly for landowners facing,
well-resourced public authorities, um,
access to justice must remain timely and effective.
Our overall assessment is, um, taken together.
The changes prioritize speed
of delivery over traditional safeguards.
Uh, whilst efficiency is a legitimate goal, uh,
it cannot come at the expense of fairness, accountability,
and the rule of law, public confidence
and infrastructure delivery, uh,
depends on striking the right balance.
So we, we've got some key recommendations.
Um, the first was to retain
or even strengthen environmental court
or environment court oversight, uh,
introduce stronger safeguards
and independent review in respect of the exercise
of emergency powers, clarify the accountability
where agencies and state owned enterprises, maybe ex
exercising compulsory acquisition powers.
We also addressed in more detail in our, um, paper,
our original submissions, uh, reconsidering the approach
to married land to, um, ensure appropriate protections,
make sure that alternative dis dispute resolution isn't
mandatory and doesn't impede timely access
to court adjudication.
Um, and, um, enhance transparency and,
and independent oversight mechanisms,
which goes hand in hand with recommending, continuation with
appeal to the environment court,
and, um, potentially enhancing the area of scope
or the area of inquiry that the Environment court can cover.
Uh, in closing, um,
the association, pardon?
About three and a half minutes left. Oh, I think you, yeah.
Uh, the association, um, supports reform
and principle, as I said,
I think the Public Works Act needs an o,
you know, complete overhaul.
Um, however, as currently drafted, we, we take the view
that the bill doesn't adequately safeguard against the risks
inherent, inherent
and expanded compulsory acquisition power set of powers.
Uh, so we urge the committee
to strengthen the procedural protections
and independent oversight mechanisms,
and, uh, this will ensure
that legislation remains consistent
with fundamental public law principles.
Thanks for your time. Thank you very, very much.
Um, questions, colleagues. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Just on this, um, environment called, um, oversight.
Um, at first reading, one of my colleagues did mention this
as a concern about the inability to pursue alternatives.
Um, so what you are suggesting, I think is that
3.1 0.3 about the designations being treated
as conclusively determinative,
but they're not actually, is that what you're saying there,
that there is an ability based on the fact that some
of them might be historical for the environment court
as it stands currently to turn its mind to looking at some
of that stuff, whereas this bill would effectively prevent
that as a, as an avenue or an option?
I think the primary, um,
issue is, um, if you get a notice
of requirement and the designation, uh, follows that, um,
we, we, we don't support the view
that designation can't be challenged.
Um, so I guess that could be done by way of, um,
seeking in some form of, uh, judicial review,
um, and the environment court, um,
as has always been there in terms of objecting to a,
uh, notice of tension to take
or a notice of desire to acquire.
So it, it seems as though there's a, there's a, um,
whittling down of access to the courts.
And the other thing I, I suppose that appears
to lack, uh, or, or,
or appears to create a conflict of interest is
that you now can make submissions to the, uh,
land information New Zealand, who will then,
presumably if it's a New Zealand Transport Agency project,
they'll presumably speak with NZTA and get their view
and obviously, and or whoever the requiring authority is.
But it's difficult to see how
that can be a fair process when the minister effectively,
or the minister that's acquiring the land,
is making a decision on the project.
Yeah, I think, um, one of
one submitted this morning talked about the, the need
for some independent oversight, uh, for the, the process.
So is your contention that the appropriate form
of independent oversight, that person was ambiguous as to
where that came from, would be the environmental court?
Or can you see some other kind of mechanism or route?
Uh, well, I mean, there's been talk for years about a, um,
specialist property, property law court.
Um, I'm not sure if they'll ever get off the ground.
Uh, and the environment court's possibly the,
probably the nearest equivalent to that.
So it's as a specialist, uh, land expertise, uh,
I don't think you could convert the land valuation tribunal
into that sort of, uh, but they're primarily concerned about
the compensation aspect.
Thank you. Um, we hit time, but I'm,
because you, you're the
last submitter and we're ahead of time.
Yeah, I I will take one, one other question, just you,
you've, um, you said that essentially designation, um,
shouldn't be able to be reexamined,
but the designation can be challenged
anyway in its own right. So, uh,
I, I said it, I I, I believe it should be able to be
Challenged. No, but the designation
can be Yeah.
Good process to get a designation Yeah.
Can end up in the environment court
and, uh, frequently does.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Absolutely. Yes.
So surely the court's already had a look at that once,
and then the properties which are affected by
that designation, the courts, well, the
Court, the court may or may not have had a look at it,
but in most cases there's at least one
or two, um, submitters that take the,
take the next step, go to the court.
Well, I, I guess I'm, I guess I'm asking that submitters
that people are affected by, it had the chance
to make a submission on the designation anyway, uh, which,
and if they wanted to take that to court,
they could have taken it to court.
Why do they need to have the double jeopardy the second time
around if you've got a designation placement and, and, and,
and the historic, but as designations elapse,
usually 10 years, uh, there is an argument
that should be longer than 10 years. The only,
The only problem with the designation scenario is
that you're then locked into your land.
You usually can't sell because of the designation,
and so you can't move on with your life or your business.
Well, there's another remedy
from that proposed, of course.
Pardon? There is another remedy proposed
that some submitters are proposed, which is
that once you get a debt, the designation, uh, once,
and you say, I do want to sell, I do want get out to, to go
and be able to move on with my life there.
There's hard, there is a hardship to buy.
Yeah, there is a hardship process,
but it, it's a little bit, um, it's a little bit hit
and miss and, um, a number of my business clients,
for example, haven't been able to show sufficient level
of hardship to get those across the line.
Um, I suppose as a taxpayer, I'd prefer that the, uh,
landowners and the business owners were moved on
in a positive head space with fair compensation.
Um, uh, I, I think only a percentage
of them actually take those hardship claims,
but it's can be quite hard to get 'em across the line.
Okay. That's, that's interesting to know.
Thank you very much. I really appreciate it.
Oh, thank you. Thank you for listening. Thank you. Thank
You. Okay.
Okay, colleagues,
we've got go to private, private Zoom now.
So if you can log yourself out and, um,
and then come back on the private Zoom.